integrations/cloud-notifications/integrations/ilert.md, before:

<!--startmeta
custom_edit_url: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/integrations/cloud-notifications/integrations/ilert.md"
meta_yaml: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/integrations/cloud-notifications/metadata.yaml"
sidebar_label: "Ilert"
learn_status: "Published"
learn_rel_path: "Alerts & Notifications/Notifications/Centralized Cloud Notifications"
message: "DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE DIRECTLY, IT IS GENERATED BY THE NOTIFICATION'S metadata.yaml FILE"
endmeta-->

# Ilert


<img src="https://netdata.cloud/img/ilert.svg" width="150"/>


From the Cloud interface, you can manage your space's notification settings and from there you can add a specific configuration to get notifications delivered on ilert.


<img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/maintained%20by-Netdata-%2300ab44" />

## Setup

### Prerequisites

To add ilert notification you need:

- A Netdata Cloud account
- Access to the space as an **Admin**
- The Space needs to be on a paid plan
- You need to have permissions on ilert to add new Alert sources.

### Settings on ilert

1. **Access the Alert sources Settings**: From the navigation bar, open the Alert sources drop down and click "Alert sources".
2. **Create a New Alert source**: Click on the "+ Create a new alert source" button.
3. **Configure an Alert source**:
  - select "API integration" and click Next
  - provide a name that suits the source's purpose, for example Netdata
  - select Escalation policy
  - select Alert grouping (optional)
  - review all configurations and click "Finish setup"
4. **Obtain the API Key**:
  - Once the Alert source is created, you will be provided with an API key.
  - Copy this API Key, as it will be required to configure the integration on Netdata Cloud.

### Settings on Netdata Cloud

1. Click on the **Space settings** cog (located above your profile icon)
2. Click on the **Alerts & Notifications** tab
3. Click on the **+ Add configuration** button
4. Click on **+ Add** on the **ilert** card 
5. A modal will be presented in order to enter the required details to enable the configuration:

- **Notification settings** are Netdata specific settings
    - Configuration name: provide a descriptive name for your configuration to easily identify it.
    - Rooms: select the nodes or areas of your infrastructure you want to receive notifications about.
    - Notification: choose the type of notifications you want to receive.
  - **Integration configuration** are the required integration settings, which vary by notification method. For ilert:
    - Alert Source API key.

Commit message:

finish pass on cloud notifications integrations

integrations/cloud-notifications/integrations/ilert.md, after:

<!--startmeta
custom_edit_url: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/integrations/cloud-notifications/integrations/ilert.md"
meta_yaml: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/integrations/cloud-notifications/metadata.yaml"
sidebar_label: "Ilert"
learn_status: "Published"
learn_rel_path: "Alerts & Notifications/Notifications/Centralized Cloud Notifications"
message: "DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE DIRECTLY, IT IS GENERATED BY THE NOTIFICATION'S metadata.yaml FILE"
endmeta-->

# Ilert


<img src="https://netdata.cloud/img/ilert.svg" width="150"/>


From the Netdata Cloud UI, you can configure notification delivery to ilert.


<img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/maintained%20by-Netdata-%2300ab44" />

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- A Netdata Cloud account
- Access to the Space as an **Admin**
- The Space needs to be on a paid plan
- You need to have permissions on ilert to add new Alert sources.

### ilert Configuration

1. From the navigation bar, open the Alert sources drop down and click "Alert sources"
2. Click on the "+ Create a new alert source" button
3. Configure an Alert source:
    - Select "API integration" and click Next
    - Provide a name that suits the source's purpose, for example "Netdata"
    - Select Escalation policy
    - Select Alert grouping (optional)
4. Obtain the API Key:
    - Once the Alert source is created, you will be provided with an API key. Copy it in order to add it to your integration configuration in the Netdata Cloud UI

### Netdata Configuration

1. Click on the **Space settings** cog (located above your profile icon)
2. Click on the **Alerts & Notifications** tab
3. Click on the **+ Add configuration** button
4. Add the ilert Integration
5. A modal will be presented to you to enter the required details to enable the integration:
    - **Notification settings**
      - Configuration name (optional): A name for your configuration in order to easily refer to it
      - Rooms: A list of Rooms for which you want to be notified
      - Notifications: The notifications which you want to be notified
    - **Integration configuration**
      - Alert Source API key: The key you copied in the ilert configuration step.
