integrations/cloud-notifications/integrations/microsoft_teams.md, before:

<!--startmeta
custom_edit_url: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/integrations/cloud-notifications/integrations/microsoft_teams.md"
meta_yaml: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/integrations/cloud-notifications/metadata.yaml"
sidebar_label: "Microsoft Teams"
learn_status: "Published"
learn_rel_path: "Alerts & Notifications/Notifications/Centralized Cloud Notifications"
message: "DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE DIRECTLY, IT IS GENERATED BY THE NOTIFICATION'S metadata.yaml FILE"
endmeta-->

# Microsoft Teams


<img src="https://netdata.cloud/img/teams.svg" width="150"/>


From the Netdata Cloud UI, you can manage your space's notification settings and enable the configuration to deliver notifications to a Microsoft Teams channel.


<img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/maintained%20by-Netdata-%2300ab44" />

## Setup

### Prerequisites

To add Microsoft Teams notifications integration to your Netdata Cloud space you will need the following:

- A Netdata Cloud account.
- Access to the Netdata Cloud space as an **Admin**.
- The Space to be on a paid plan.
- A [Microsoft 365 for Business Account](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/business). Note that this is a **paid** account.

### Settings on Microsoft Teams

- The integration gets enabled at a team's channel level.
- Click on the `...` (aka three dots) icon showing up next to the channel name, it should appear when you hover over it.
- Click on `Connectors`.
- Look for the `Incoming Webhook` connector and click configure.
- Provide a name for your Incoming Webhook Connector, for example _Netdata Alerts_. You can also customize it with a proper icon instead of using the default image.
- Click `Create`.
- The _Incoming Webhook URL_ is created.
- That is the URL to be provided to the Netdata Cloud configuration.

### Settings on Netdata Cloud

1. Click on the **Space settings** cog (located above your profile icon).
2. Click on the **Notification** tab.
3. Click on the **+ Add configuration** button (near the top-right corner of your screen).
4. On the **Microsoft Teams** card click on **+ Add**.
5. A modal will be presented to you to enter the required details to enable the configuration:
  * **Notification settings** are Netdata specific settings:
      - Configuration name - you can optionally provide a name for your configuration  you can easily refer to it.
      - Rooms - by specifying a list of Rooms you are select to which nodes or areas of your infrastructure you want to be notified using this configuration.
      - Notification - you specify which notifications you want to be notified using this configuration: All Alerts and unreachable, All Alerts, Critical only.
  * **Integration configuration** are the specific notification integration required settings, which vary by notification method. For Microsoft Teams:
      - Microsoft Teams Incoming Webhook URL - the _Incoming Webhook URL_ that was generated earlier.

Commit message:

Update Cloud MSTeam documentation (#18224)
* docs: update cloud MSTeam documentation

* docs: improve ms teams

integrations/cloud-notifications/integrations/microsoft_teams.md, after:

<!--startmeta
custom_edit_url: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/integrations/cloud-notifications/integrations/microsoft_teams.md"
meta_yaml: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/integrations/cloud-notifications/metadata.yaml"
sidebar_label: "Microsoft Teams"
learn_status: "Published"
learn_rel_path: "Alerts & Notifications/Notifications/Centralized Cloud Notifications"
message: "DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE DIRECTLY, IT IS GENERATED BY THE NOTIFICATION'S metadata.yaml FILE"
endmeta-->

# Microsoft Teams


<img src="https://netdata.cloud/img/teams.svg" width="150"/>


From the Netdata Cloud UI, you can manage your space's notification settings and enable the configuration to deliver notifications to a Microsoft Teams channel.


<img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/maintained%20by-Netdata-%2300ab44" />

## Setup

### Prerequisites

To add Microsoft Teams notifications integration to your Netdata Cloud space you will need the following:

- A Netdata Cloud account.
- Access to the Netdata Cloud space as an **Admin**.
- The Space to be on a paid plan.
- A [Microsoft Teams Essentials subscription](https://www.microsoft.com/en-sg/microsoft-teams/essentials) or higher. Note that this is a **paid** feature.

### Settings on Microsoft Teams

- The integration gets enabled at a team's channel level.
- Click on the `...` (aka three dots) icon showing up next to the channel name, it should appear when you hover over it.
- Click on `Workflows`.
- Select `Post to a channel when a webhook request is received`.
- Provide a name for your Incoming Workflow, for example _Netdata Alerts_.
- Click `Next`.
- Select `Team` and `Channel` where notifications will be posted to.
- Click `Add workflow`.
- The _Workflow Webhook URL_ is created.
- That is the URL to be provided to the Netdata Cloud configuration.

### Settings on Netdata Cloud

1. Click on the **Space settings** cog (located above your profile icon).
2. Click on the **Notification** tab.
3. Click on the **+ Add configuration** button (near the top-right corner of your screen).
4. On the **Microsoft Teams** card click on **+ Add**.
5. A modal will be presented to you to enter the required details to enable the configuration:
  * **Notification settings** are Netdata specific settings:
      - Configuration name - you can optionally provide a name for your configuration  you can easily refer to it.
      - Rooms - by specifying a list of Rooms you are select to which nodes or areas of your infrastructure you want to be notified using this configuration.
      - Notification - you specify which notifications you want to be notified using this configuration: All Alerts and unreachable, All Alerts, Critical only.
  * **Integration configuration** are the specific notification integration required settings, which vary by notification method. For Microsoft Teams:
      - Microsoft Teams Incoming Webhook URL - the _Incoming Webhook URL_ that was generated earlier.
