docs/alerts/advanced-techniques/2-multi-dimensional.md, before:

# 8.2 Multi-Dimensional and Per-Instance Alerts

Multi-dimensional alerts target specific dimensions within a chart, while templates create alerts for every matching chart instance automatically.

## 8.2.1 Dimension Selection

```conf
template: interface_inbound_errors
    on: net.errors
lookup: average -1m of inbound,outbound
     every: 1m
      warn: $this > 10
```

## 8.2.2 Scaling to All Instances

Templates automatically create one alert per matching chart.

```conf
template: interface_inbound_errors
    on: net.errors
lookup: average -5m of inbound
     every: 1m
      warn: $this > 10
```

Creates alerts for: `interface_inbound_errors-eth0`, `interface_inbound_errors-eth1`, etc.

## 8.2.3 Related Sections

- **[1.2 Alert Types: alarm vs template](../understanding-alerts/2-alert-types-alarm-vs-template.md)** for conceptual understanding

## What's Next

- **[8.3 Host and Label Targeting](3-label-targeting.md)** for fine-grained scoping with labels
- **[8.4 Custom Actions](4-custom-actions.md)** for exec-based automation

Commit message:

[Alert Docs] Chapter 8 fixes: verify against source code
- Fix 1-hysteresis.md: Correct hysteresis example (was using wrong status logic)
  * Changed from: warn: ( > 80) && (0 != )
  * Changed to: proper asymmetric hysteresis with ok: line
  * Fixed lookup to -10m unaligned to match stock alert

- Fix 3-label-targeting.md: REMOVED fake  in calc expression
  *  is NOT a valid variable in calc expressions (verified in source)
  * Replaced with correct host labels: syntax from stock alerts

- Fix 2-multi-dimensional.md: Fixed interface_inbound_errors lookup
  * Changed to match stock alert format: sum -10m unaligned absolute

- Fix 4-custom-actions.md: Updated exec example to match stock alert
  * Added class, type, component, delay, units from stock alert

- Fix 5-performance.md: Updated lookup to match 10min_cpu_usage template

- All exec argument positions verified against health_notifications.c (34 args)

- Updated README with more descriptive section titles

docs/alerts/advanced-techniques/2-multi-dimensional.md, after:

# 8.2 Multi-Dimensional and Per-Instance Alerts

Multi-dimensional alerts target specific dimensions within a chart, while templates create alerts for every matching chart instance automatically.

## 8.2.1 Dimension Selection

Target specific dimensions within a chart:

```conf
template: interface_inbound_errors
    on: net.errors
lookup: sum -10m unaligned absolute of inbound
     units: errors
     every: 1m
      warn: $this >= 5
```

This monitors only the `inbound` dimension of net.errors charts.

## 8.2.2 Scaling to All Instances

Templates automatically create one alert per matching chart.

```conf
template: interface_inbound_errors
    on: net.errors
lookup: average -5m of inbound
     every: 1m
      warn: $this > 10
```

Creates alerts for: `interface_inbound_errors-eth0`, `interface_inbound_errors-eth1`, etc.

## 8.2.3 Related Sections

- **[1.2 Alert Types: alarm vs template](../understanding-alerts/2-alert-types-alarm-vs-template.md)** for conceptual understanding

## What's Next

- **[8.3 Host and Label Targeting](3-label-targeting.md)** for fine-grained scoping with labels
- **[8.4 Custom Actions](4-custom-actions.md)** for exec-based automation
