docs/alerts/advanced-techniques/5-performance.md, before:

# 8.5 Performance Considerations

## 8.5.1 What Affects Performance

| Factor | Impact | Recommendation |
|--------|--------|----------------|
| `every` frequency | Higher = more CPU | Use 1m for most alerts |
| `lookup` window | Longer windows need more processing | Match to needs |
| Number of alerts | More alerts = more evaluation | Disable unused alerts |

## 8.5.2 Efficient Configuration

```conf
# Efficient: 1-minute evaluation
template: 10min_cpu_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -10m unaligned of user,system
     units: %
     every: 1m     # Good: 60 evaluations/hour
      warn: $this > 80
      crit: $this > 95

# Inefficient: 10-second evaluation
template: 10min_cpu_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -1m unaligned of user,system
     units: %
     every: 10s    # Bad: 360 evaluations/hour
      warn: $this > 80
      crit: $this > 95
```

## 8.5.3 Related Sections

- **[13.1 Evaluation Architecture](../architecture/1-evaluation-architecture.md)** for internal behavior

## What's Next

- **[Chapter 4: Controlling Alerts and Noise](../controlling-alerts-noise/index.md)** for reducing noise
- **[Chapter 7: Troubleshooting](../troubleshooting-alerts/index.md)** for debugging alerts

Commit message:

[Alert Docs] Fix backwards What's Next reference in 8.5
- Changed Chapter 7 → Chapter 9 (forward progression)
- Changed Chapter 4 → Chapter 13 (forward progression)

docs/alerts/advanced-techniques/5-performance.md, after:

# 8.5 Performance Considerations

## 8.5.1 What Affects Performance

| Factor | Impact | Recommendation |
|--------|--------|----------------|
| `every` frequency | Higher = more CPU | Use 1m for most alerts |
| `lookup` window | Longer windows need more processing | Match to needs |
| Number of alerts | More alerts = more evaluation | Disable unused alerts |

## 8.5.2 Efficient Configuration

```conf
# Efficient: 1-minute evaluation
template: 10min_cpu_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -10m unaligned of user,system
     units: %
     every: 1m     # Good: 60 evaluations/hour
      warn: $this > 80
      crit: $this > 95

# Inefficient: 10-second evaluation
template: 10min_cpu_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -1m unaligned of user,system
     units: %
     every: 10s    # Bad: 360 evaluations/hour
      warn: $this > 80
      crit: $this > 95
```

## 8.5.3 Related Sections

- **[13.1 Evaluation Architecture](../architecture/1-evaluation-architecture.md)** for internal behavior

## What's Next

- **[Chapter 9: APIs for Alerts and Events](../apis-alerts-events/index.md)** for programmatic alert management
- **[Chapter 13: Architecture](../architecture/index.md)** for deep-dive internals
