{\rtf1\ansi\deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0 Times New Roman;}}
\paperh15840 \paperw12240
\margl720 \margr720 \margt720 \margb720
\f0\fs24
# Netdata Cloud UI License v1.0 (NCUL1)\line
\line
## Acceptance\line
By using the software, you agree to all of the terms and conditions below.\line
\line
## Copyright License\line
The licensor grants you a non-exclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, non-sublicensable, non-transferable license to use, copy, distribute, make available the software, in each case subject to the limitations, restrictions and conditions below.\line
\line
## Limitations\line
This license allows you to use the Software only to interface with the licensor's other software components, such as Netdata Agents and Netdata Cloud. Any use with replacements for these components is not permitted.\line
\line
## Restrictions\line
The Software is provided in a binary form for use by end-users. You may not reverse engineer, decompile, disassemble, or modify the Software. The Software is licensed as a single product and its component parts may not be separated.\line
\line
## Patents\line
If you or your company make any written claim that the software infringes or contributes to infringement of any patent, your license for the software granted under these terms ends immediately. If your company makes such a claim, your license ends immediately for work on behalf of your company.\line
\line
## Notices\line
You must ensure that anyone who gets a copy of the Software from you also gets a copy of these terms.\line
\line
## No Other Rights\line
These terms do not imply any licenses other than those expressly granted in these terms.\line
\line
## Termination\line
If you use the Software in violation of any of these terms, such use is not licensed, and your licenses will automatically terminate. If the licensor provides you with a notice of your violation, and you cease all violations of this license no later than 30 days after you receive that notice, your licenses will be reinstated retroactively. However, if you violate these terms after such reinstatement, any additional violation of these terms will cause your licenses to terminate automatically and permanently.\line
\line
## No Warranties and No Liability\line
The software comes "As Is", without any express or implied warranties of any kind, including but not limited to any warranties of merchantability, non-infringement, or fitness for a particular purpose. The licensor will not be liable to you for any damages arising out of these terms or the use or nature of the Software, under any kind of legal claim.\line
\line
## Open Source Components\line
The software includes certain third party open source components. Each of these components is subject to its own license. The list of open-source components used by Netdata Cloud UI is [here](https://app.netdata.cloud/3D_PARTY_LICENSES.txt).\line
\line
## Definitions\line
The "licensor" is Netdata Inc., the entity offering these terms, and the "**software**" is the Netdata Cloud UI software the licensor makes available under these terms, including any portion of it.\line
\line
"**you**" refers to the individual or entity agreeing to these terms.\line
\line
"**your company**" is any legal entity, sole proprietorship, or other kind of organization that you work for, plus all organizations that have control over, are under the control of, or are under common control with that organization. "**Control**" means ownership of substantially all the assets of an entity, or the power to direct its management and policies by vote, contract, or otherwise. Control can be direct or indirect.\line
\line
"**your licenses**" are all the licenses granted to you for the software under these terms.\line
\line
"**use**" means anything you do with the software requiring one of your licenses.\line
}
