<!--startmeta
custom_edit_url: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/collectors/python.d.plugin/changefinder/README.md"
meta_yaml: "https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/collectors/python.d.plugin/changefinder/metadata.yaml"
sidebar_label: "python.d changefinder"
learn_status: "Published"
learn_rel_path: "Data Collection/Other"
message: "DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE DIRECTLY, IT IS GENERATED BY THE COLLECTOR'S metadata.yaml FILE"
endmeta-->

# python.d changefinder

Plugin: python.d.plugin
Module: changefinder

## Overview





This collector is supported on all platforms.

This collector supports collecting metrics from multiple instances of this integration, including remote instances.


### Default Behavior

#### Auto-Detection

This integration doesn't support auto-detection.

#### Limits

The default configuration for this integration does not impose any limits on data collection.

#### Performance Impact

The default configuration for this integration is not expected to impose a significant performance impact on the system.


## Metrics

Metrics grouped by *scope*.

The scope defines the instance that the metric belongs to. An instance is uniquely identified by a set of labels.



### Per python.d changefinder instance



This scope has no labels.

Metrics:

| Metric | Dimensions | Unit |
|:------|:----------|:----|
| changefinder.scores | a dimension per chart | score |
| changefinder.flags | a dimension per chart | flag |



## Alerts

There are no alerts configured by default for this integration.


## Setup

### Prerequisites

No action required.

### Configuration

#### File

There is no configuration file.
#### Options



There are no configuration options.

#### Examples
There are no configuration examples.



## Troubleshooting

### Debug Mode

To troubleshoot issues with the `changefinder` collector, run the `python.d.plugin` with the debug option enabled. The output
should give you clues as to why the collector isn't working.

- Navigate to the `plugins.d` directory, usually at `/usr/libexec/netdata/plugins.d/`. If that's not the case on
  your system, open `netdata.conf` and look for the `plugins` setting under `[directories]`.

  ```bash
  cd /usr/libexec/netdata/plugins.d/
  ```

- Switch to the `netdata` user.

  ```bash
  sudo -u netdata -s
  ```

- Run the `python.d.plugin` to debug the collector:

  ```bash
  ./python.d.plugin changefinder debug trace
  ```


