### Understand the alert

This alert is generated by the Netdata Agent when monitoring web server logs. This alert is triggered when the web server has experienced an unusually high number of internal errors (HTTP status codes 5xx) within the last minute. Internal errors indicate that there is an issue with the server or the application running on it, which is causing the server to fail in processing client requests.

### Troubleshoot the alert

1. **Check the web server logs**: Inspect the web server logs to identify the specific internal errors and any patterns that might be causing the issue. Depending on the web server you are using (e.g., Apache, Nginx, etc.), the log files will be located in different directories. You can usually find the logs in the following locations:

   - Apache: `/var/log/apache2/` (Debian/Ubuntu) or `/var/log/httpd/` (RHEL/CentOS)
   - Nginx: `/var/log/nginx/`

   To view the logs in real-time, you can use the `tail` command:

   ```
   tail -f /path/to/your/log/directory/access.log
   ```

2. **Analyze the application logs**: If you have an application running on the web server (e.g., PHP, Node.js, Python), check the application logs for any errors or issues that might be causing the internal errors.

3. **Verify server resources**: Ensure that your server has enough resources (CPU, RAM, disk space) to handle the current workload. High resource utilization can lead to internal errors. You can use Netdata's dashboard to monitor the server resources in real-time.

4. **Check server configuration**: Review the web server's configuration files for any misconfigurations or settings that may be causing the issue. For example, incorrect permissions, wrong file paths, or improper configurations can lead to internal errors.

5. **Inspect application code**: Review your application code to identify any bugs, memory leaks, or issues that could be causing the internal errors. If you recently deployed new code or made changes, consider rolling back to a previous version to see if the issue persists.

6. **Monitor web server metrics**: Keep an eye on the web server's metrics, such as response times and request rates, to identify any performance bottlenecks or potential issues that may be causing the internal errors.

### Useful resources

1. [Server errors on Datatracker](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2616#section-10.5)
2. [HTTP server errors on Mozilla](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status#server_error_responses)
