docs/alerts/alert-examples/1-core-system-alerts.md, before:

# 6.1 Core System Alerts

## 6.1.1 CPU Utilization Alert

```conf
template: cpu_high_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -5m of user,system,softirq,irq,guest
    units: %
    every: 1m
     warn: $this > 80
     crit: $this > 95
       to: sysadmin
     info: CPU utilization at ${value}%
```

## 6.1.2 Memory Pressure Alert

```conf
template: ram_low_available
    on: mem.available
lookup: average -5m of avail
    units: MB
    every: 1m
     warn: $this < 1024
     crit: $this < 512
       to: sysadmin
```

## 6.1.3 Disk Space Alert

```conf
template: disk_space_low
    on: disk.space
lookup: average -1m percentage of avail
    units: %
    every: 1m
     warn: $this < 10
     crit: $this < 5
       to: sysadmin
```

## 6.1.4 Network Errors Alert

```conf
template: net_errors_high
    on: net.errors
lookup: average -5m of inbound,outbound
    units: errors
    every: 1m
     warn: $this > 0
     crit: $this > 10
       to: sysadmin
```

## 6.1.5 Related Sections

- **6.2 Service and Availability** - Service health alerts
- **6.3 Application Alerts** - Database and web server alerts

Commit message:

[Alert Docs] Add section intros
Added small descriptions where missing across alert documentation:
- 6.1 Core System Alerts: context and targets
- 6.2 Service Availability: portcheck/httpcheck contexts
- 6.3 Application Alerts: database/web server contexts
- 6.4 Anomaly Alerts: ML requirement context
- 6.5 Trend Alerts: capacity planning context
- 8.2 Multi-Dimensional: dimension selection scope
- 8.3 Label-Based Targeting: label scoping purpose
- 5.4 Controlling Recipients: routing explanation
- 7.2 Always Critical: cause of stuck alerts
- 7.3 Alert Flapping: noise impact description
- 7.4 Variables Not Found: error context

docs/alerts/alert-examples/1-core-system-alerts.md, after:

# 6.1 Core System Alerts

These templates demonstrate the most common alerts for fundamental server resources. Each example targets the `system.` contexts that exist on every Netdata node.

## 6.1.1 CPU Utilization Alert

```conf
template: cpu_high_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -5m of user,system,softirq,irq,guest
    units: %
    every: 1m
     warn: $this > 80
     crit: $this > 95
       to: sysadmin
     info: CPU utilization at ${value}%
```

## 6.1.2 Memory Pressure Alert

```conf
template: ram_low_available
    on: mem.available
lookup: average -5m of avail
    units: MB
    every: 1m
     warn: $this < 1024
     crit: $this < 512
       to: sysadmin
```

## 6.1.3 Disk Space Alert

```conf
template: disk_space_low
    on: disk.space
lookup: average -1m percentage of avail
    units: %
    every: 1m
     warn: $this < 10
     crit: $this < 5
       to: sysadmin
```

## 6.1.4 Network Errors Alert

```conf
template: net_errors_high
    on: net.errors
lookup: average -5m of inbound,outbound
    units: errors
    every: 1m
     warn: $this > 0
     crit: $this > 10
       to: sysadmin
```

## 6.1.5 Related Sections

- **6.2 Service and Availability** - Service health alerts
- **6.3 Application Alerts** - Database and web server alerts
