docs/alerts/alert-examples/4-anomaly-alerts.md, before:

# 6.4 Anomaly-Based Alerts

Anomaly detection uses Netdata's ML models to identify unusual metric behavior without fixed thresholds. Requires `ml.conf` enabled on the node.

## 6.4.1 Anomaly Bit Alert

```conf
template: 10min_cpu_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -5m unaligned of user
     units: %
     every: 1m
      warn: $anomaly_bit > 0.5
        to: sysadmin
```

Requires ML enabled with sufficient historical data.

## 6.4.2 Adaptive Threshold

```conf
template: 10min_cpu_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -5m of user
     units: %
     every: 1m
      warn: ($this > ($this - 10m + 2 * $stddev)) && ($this > 80)
        to: netops
```

See **3.3 Calculations and Transformations** for complex expressions.

## 6.4.3 Related Sections

- **[6.5 Trend and Capacity Alerts](5-trend-capacity.md)** - Predictive alerts
- **[8.4 Custom Actions with exec](../advanced-techniques/4-custom-actions.md)** - Automation with exec

## What's Next

- **[Chapter 7: Troubleshooting Alerts](../troubleshooting-alerts/index.md)** - Debugging alert issues
- **[Chapter 5: Receiving Notifications](../receiving-notifications/index.md)** - Configure alert delivery

Commit message:

[Alert Docs] Chapter 6 fixes: clarify examples, fix stock alert syntax
- Update all Chapter 6 files with clarification notes (simplified examples vs stock)
- Fix 6.1.1 CPU: lookup -10m (was -5m) to match 10min_cpu_usage template
- Fix 6.2.1 portcheck: correct lookup (-5m, unaligned, no_connection,failed)
- Fix 6.2.2 httpcheck: correct lookup (-5m, unaligned) and thresholds
- Fix 6.3.1 MySQL: lookup -10s, every 10s (was -5m, 1m) to match stock alert
- All examples now use more accurate stock alert syntax

docs/alerts/alert-examples/4-anomaly-alerts.md, after:

# 6.4 Anomaly-Based Alerts

Anomaly detection uses Netdata's ML models to identify unusual metric behavior without fixed thresholds. Requires `ml.conf` enabled on the node.

:::tip

The examples below show conceptual patterns for anomaly-based alerting. Stock alerts include additional metadata and conditional logic. Use these as starting points for your own anomaly detection configurations.

:::

## 6.4.1 Anomaly Bit Alert

```conf
template: 10min_cpu_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -5m unaligned of user
     units: %
     every: 1m
      warn: $anomaly_bit > 0.5
        to: sysadmin
```

Requires ML enabled with sufficient historical data.

## 6.4.2 Adaptive Threshold

```conf
template: 10min_cpu_usage
    on: system.cpu
lookup: average -5m of user
     units: %
     every: 1m
      warn: ($this > ($this - 10m + 2 * $stddev)) && ($this > 80)
        to: netops
```

See **3.3 Calculations and Transformations** for complex expressions.

## 6.4.3 Related Sections

- **[6.5 Trend and Capacity Alerts](5-trend-capacity.md)** - Predictive alerts
- **[8.4 Custom Actions with exec](../advanced-techniques/4-custom-actions.md)** - Automation with exec

## What's Next

- **[Chapter 7: Troubleshooting Alerts](../troubleshooting-alerts/index.md)** - Debugging alert issues
- **[Chapter 5: Receiving Notifications](../receiving-notifications/index.md)** - Configure alert delivery
