docs/learn/mcp.md, before:

# Netdata MCP Integration: AI-Powered Infrastructure Analysis

## What is MCP?

**Model Context Protocol (MCP)** is a new open standard that allows AI assistants to connect directly to your data sources and tools. Think of it as a bridge that lets AI systems access and analyze your real-time infrastructure data instead of just providing generic advice.

:::note

**Learn More**: MCP is an open standard created by Anthropic. For technical details about the protocol specification, visit [Anthropic's MCP documentation](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/).

:::

## How Netdata is Pioneering AI-Powered Monitoring

Netdata is **one of the first monitoring platforms** to integrate MCP, placing us among the pioneers in AI-powered infrastructure analysis. We've built a direct connection between advanced AI models (like Claude) and your Netdata monitoring data, creating an intelligent troubleshooting partner that understands your specific infrastructure.

### What Makes This Revolutionary

**Traditional monitoring**: You look at charts and graphs, manually correlating data across different services to find problems.

**Netdata with MCP**: AI analyzes your actual monitoring data in real-time, automatically correlates anomalies across your entire infrastructure, and provides expert-level post-mortem analysis.

## What This Changes for You

### Instant Expert Analysis

Instead of spending hours analyzing charts during an incident, you can now:

- **Ask natural questions**: "What caused the outage between 13:00-13:30 UTC?"
- **Get comprehensive post-mortems**: AI analyzes your metrics, identifies root causes, and maps dependency chains
- **Understand complex correlations**: AI detects which services were affected and why

### Real-World Example

**The Problem**: EMQX message broker goes down, affecting multiple services across your infrastructure.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A("🚨 EMQX Outage Occurs")
    
    B("📊 Traditional Approach")
    C("🤖 Netdata + MCP")
    
    D("Manual dashboard review<br/>⏱️ Hours of analysis")
    E("AI analyzes all metrics<br/>⚡ Instant correlation")
    
    F("❌ Slow resolution<br/>Missed dependencies")
    G("✅ Fast resolution<br/>Complete root cause")
    
    A --> B
    A --> C
    B --> D
    C --> E
    D --> F
    E --> G
    
    %% Styling
    classDef problem fill:#ffeb3b,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    classDef traditional fill:#ff7043,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    classDef ai fill:#42a5f5,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    classDef outcome fill:#f5f5f5,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    
    class A problem
    class B,D traditional
    class C,E ai
    class F,G outcome
```

### Advanced Anomaly Detection

Your AI assistant can:

- **Detect anomaly patterns** across your entire infrastructure
- **Identify cascade failures** before they become critical
- **Explain complex service dependencies** in plain language
- **Predict which services will be affected** by specific component failures

## Current Capabilities

### What You Can Do Today

| Capability                  | What You Get                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Key Benefits                                                                                             |
|-----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Infrastructure Analysis** | **Post-mortem analysis** of incidents with **root cause identification**, **real-time anomaly correlation** across all your services, **service dependency mapping** and impact analysis, **performance bottleneck identification**              | Understand complex incidents in minutes instead of hours, identify cascading failures before they spread |
| **Intelligent Querying**    | Ask questions about your infrastructure in **natural language**, get **explanations of complex metrics** and their relationships, understand **streaming configurations** and network topologies, analyze **resource usage patterns** and trends | No more manual chart correlation - just ask and get expert-level insights                                |
| **Expert Troubleshooting**  | **AI-powered investigation** of performance issues, **automated correlation** of events across your infrastructure, **context-aware recommendations** based on your specific setup                                                               | Get the analysis that would normally require a senior engineer, available 24/7                           |

### How to Get Started

1. **Install Netdata nightly build** (required for MCP support)
2. **Set up the MCP bridge** using our nd-mcp tool
3. **Connect your AI assistant** (Claude Desktop recommended)
4. **Start asking questions** about your infrastructure

:::note

**Current Version**: MCP integration works with both individual Netdata agents and parent agents that aggregate data from multiple nodes. When connected to a parent, AI can analyze data across all nodes that stream to that parent.

:::

## What's Coming Next

### Netdata Cloud Integration

**The next major step**: MCP will integrate directly with Netdata Cloud, giving you access to your complete infrastructure data:

- **Organization-wide analysis** across all your monitored infrastructure
- **Cross-room correlation** for complex distributed systems
- **Complete infrastructure visibility** through AI analysis
- **Team-wide insights** from your centralized monitoring data

### Beyond Single Nodes

**Current capability**: MCP integration works with individual Netdata agents and parent agents that aggregate multiple nodes.

**Coming soon**: Direct access to your Netdata Cloud data, enabling AI analysis across your entire infrastructure ecosystem with full organizational context.

## The Future of Infrastructure Monitoring

With Netdata MCP, we're moving toward a future where:

- **AI understands your infrastructure** as well as your best engineers
- **Troubleshooting becomes conversational** rather than manual chart analysis
- **Post-mortems write themselves** with complete root cause analysis
- **Your monitoring system becomes a team member** that helps solve problems

**Join us in pioneering the next generation of intelligent infrastructure monitoring.**

:::tip

**Ready to try it?** Contact us to get early access to MCP integration, or check our GitHub repository for the latest nd-mcp tools and setup instructions.

:::

Commit message:

docs: add Netdata MCP Server preview announcement

docs/learn/mcp.md, after:

# Netdata MCP Integration: AI-Powered Infrastructure Analysis

:::info

The Netdata MCP Server preview is live. [Get early access](b6yi53u6qjm.typeform.com/to/DQi5ibhE?typeform-source=www.netdata.cloud) or visit our GitHub repository for the latest nd-mcp tools and setup instructions.

:::

## What is MCP?

**Model Context Protocol (MCP)** is a new open standard that allows AI assistants to connect directly to your data sources and tools. Think of it as a bridge that lets AI systems access and analyze your real-time infrastructure data instead of just providing generic advice.

:::note

**Learn More**: MCP is an open standard created by Anthropic. For technical details about the protocol specification, visit [Anthropic's MCP documentation](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/).

:::

## How Netdata is Pioneering AI-Powered Monitoring

Netdata is **one of the first monitoring platforms** to integrate MCP, placing us among the pioneers in AI-powered infrastructure analysis. We've built a direct connection between advanced AI models (like Claude) and your Netdata monitoring data, creating an intelligent troubleshooting partner that understands your specific infrastructure.

### What Makes This Revolutionary

**Traditional monitoring**: You look at charts and graphs, manually correlating data across different services to find problems.

**Netdata with MCP**: AI analyzes your actual monitoring data in real-time, automatically correlates anomalies across your entire infrastructure, and provides expert-level post-mortem analysis.

## What This Changes for You

### Instant Expert Analysis

Instead of spending hours analyzing charts during an incident, you can now:

- **Ask natural questions**: "What caused the outage between 13:00-13:30 UTC?"
- **Get comprehensive post-mortems**: AI analyzes your metrics, identifies root causes, and maps dependency chains
- **Understand complex correlations**: AI detects which services were affected and why

### Real-World Example

**The Problem**: EMQX message broker goes down, affecting multiple services across your infrastructure.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A("🚨 EMQX Outage Occurs")
    
    B("📊 Traditional Approach")
    C("🤖 Netdata + MCP")
    
    D("Manual dashboard review<br/>⏱️ Hours of analysis")
    E("AI analyzes all metrics<br/>⚡ Instant correlation")
    
    F("❌ Slow resolution<br/>Missed dependencies")
    G("✅ Fast resolution<br/>Complete root cause")
    
    A --> B
    A --> C
    B --> D
    C --> E
    D --> F
    E --> G
    
    %% Styling
    classDef problem fill:#ffeb3b,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    classDef traditional fill:#ff7043,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    classDef ai fill:#42a5f5,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    classDef outcome fill:#f5f5f5,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    
    class A problem
    class B,D traditional
    class C,E ai
    class F,G outcome
```

### Advanced Anomaly Detection

Your AI assistant can:

- **Detect anomaly patterns** across your entire infrastructure
- **Identify cascade failures** before they become critical
- **Explain complex service dependencies** in plain language
- **Predict which services will be affected** by specific component failures

## Current Capabilities

### What You Can Do Today

| Capability                  | What You Get                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Key Benefits                                                                                             |
|-----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Infrastructure Analysis** | **Post-mortem analysis** of incidents with **root cause identification**, **real-time anomaly correlation** across all your services, **service dependency mapping** and impact analysis, **performance bottleneck identification**              | Understand complex incidents in minutes instead of hours, identify cascading failures before they spread |
| **Intelligent Querying**    | Ask questions about your infrastructure in **natural language**, get **explanations of complex metrics** and their relationships, understand **streaming configurations** and network topologies, analyze **resource usage patterns** and trends | No more manual chart correlation - just ask and get expert-level insights                                |
| **Expert Troubleshooting**  | **AI-powered investigation** of performance issues, **automated correlation** of events across your infrastructure, **context-aware recommendations** based on your specific setup                                                               | Get the analysis that would normally require a senior engineer, available 24/7                           |

### How to Get Started

1. **Install Netdata nightly build** (required for MCP support)
2. **Set up the MCP bridge** using our nd-mcp tool
3. **Connect your AI assistant** (Claude Desktop recommended)
4. **Start asking questions** about your infrastructure

:::note

**Current Version**: MCP integration works with both individual Netdata agents and parent agents that aggregate data from multiple nodes. When connected to a parent, AI can analyze data across all nodes that stream to that parent.

:::

## What's Coming Next

### Netdata Cloud Integration

**The next major step**: MCP will integrate directly with Netdata Cloud, giving you access to your complete infrastructure data:

- **Organization-wide analysis** across all your monitored infrastructure
- **Cross-room correlation** for complex distributed systems
- **Complete infrastructure visibility** through AI analysis
- **Team-wide insights** from your centralized monitoring data

### Beyond Single Nodes

**Current capability**: MCP integration works with individual Netdata agents and parent agents that aggregate multiple nodes.

**Coming soon**: Direct access to your Netdata Cloud data, enabling AI analysis across your entire infrastructure ecosystem with full organizational context.

## The Future of Infrastructure Monitoring

With Netdata MCP, we're moving toward a future where:

- **AI understands your infrastructure** as well as your best engineers
- **Troubleshooting becomes conversational** rather than manual chart analysis
- **Post-mortems write themselves** with complete root cause analysis
- **Your monitoring system becomes a team member** that helps solve problems

**Join us in pioneering the next generation of intelligent infrastructure monitoring.**
