docs/Agent-Files-Orchestration.md, before:

# Multi-Agent Orchestration

Configure advanced multi-agent patterns: advisors for pre-consultation, routers for dynamic delegation, and handoff for post-processing.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview) - What orchestration patterns enable
- [Quick Example](#quick-example) - Basic orchestration examples
- [Advisors](#advisors) - Pre-execution consultation
- [Router](#router) - Dynamic agent delegation
- [Handoff](#handoff) - Post-execution processing
- [Combining Patterns](#combining-patterns) - Using multiple patterns together
- [Common Patterns](#common-patterns) - Typical orchestration configurations
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) - Common mistakes and fixes
- [See Also](#see-also) - Related pages

---

## Overview

Orchestration patterns run **outside** the main session loop:

- **Advisors**: Run in parallel BEFORE the main session, inject context
- **Router**: Enables the main session to hand off to a destination agent
- **Handoff**: Runs AFTER the main session, post-processes the output

These differ from `agents` (sub-agents), which are tools called DURING the session.

**User questions answered**: "How do I set up advisors?" / "How do I route to different agents?"

---

## Quick Example

### Advisors

```yaml
---
description: Agent with compliance and security advisors
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance.ai
  - ./advisors/security.ai
---

[Advisor outputs are injected here automatically]

You help users with their requests while respecting compliance and security guidance.
```

### Router

```yaml
---
description: Customer service router
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
    - ./handlers/general.ai
maxTurns: 3
temperature: 0
---
Analyze the request and route to the appropriate handler.
Use `router__handoff-to` with the destination path.
```

### Handoff

```yaml
---
description: Research agent with formatting handoff
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
tools:
  - brave
handoff: ./formatters/report.ai
---
Research the topic thoroughly. Results will be formatted automatically.
```

---

## Advisors

Advisors are agents that run **before** the main session. Their outputs are injected as context for the main agent.

### Configuration

| Property     | Value                  |
| ------------ | ---------------------- |
| Type         | `string` or `string[]` |
| Default      | `[]` (no advisors)     |
| Valid values | Paths to `.ai` files   |

```yaml
---
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance.ai
  - ./advisors/security.ai
---
```

### How Advisors Work

1. All advisors run **in parallel** before the main session
2. Each advisor receives the user's prompt
3. Advisor outputs are collected
4. Outputs are injected into the main agent's context
5. Main session runs with advisory context available

### Execution Flow

```
User Request
     │
     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│    Advisors (parallel)       │
│  ┌─────────┐  ┌─────────┐   │
│  │Compliance│  │Security │   │
│  └────┬────┘  └────┬────┘   │
│       │            │         │
│       ▼            ▼         │
│   [advice 1]   [advice 2]    │
└─────────────────────────────┘
              │
              ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│    Main Session              │
│  (with advisor context)      │
└─────────────────────────────┘
              │
              ▼
         Response
```

### Advisor Requirements

Advisors are regular `.ai` files. They should:

- Have a `description`
- Return useful advisory content
- Be fast (they block the main session)

**Example advisor** (`./advisors/compliance.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Reviews requests for compliance issues
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
maxTurns: 3
temperature: 0
---

Review the user's request for compliance issues.

If issues found:
- List each issue briefly
- Suggest modifications

If no issues: respond "No compliance issues identified."
```

### Advisor Failure Handling

If an advisor fails:

- It becomes a synthetic advisory block with error info
- Main session still runs
- Failure does NOT stop execution

### Best Practices

- Keep advisors **fast** (low `maxTurns`, simple tasks)
- Use cheaper/faster models for advisors
- Design for parallel execution (no dependencies between advisors)
- Handle the case where advisor fails gracefully

---

## Router

Router pattern enables an agent to dynamically delegate to specialized handlers.

### Configuration

| Property | Value                                       |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| Type     | `object` with `destinations: string[]`      |
| Default  | None (no routing)                           |
| Required | `destinations` array with at least one path |

```yaml
---
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
    - ./handlers/general.ai
---
```

### How Router Works

1. Router agent receives the user's request
2. Router analyzes and decides which destination to use
3. Router calls `router__handoff-to` tool with the destination
4. Destination agent takes over and produces the final response
5. Destination's response becomes the final output

### The router\_\_handoff-to Tool

When `router.destinations` is configured, a special tool becomes available:

**Tool**: `router__handoff-to`
**Input**:

```json
{
  "agent": "./handlers/billing.ai", // Destination path (exact string from router.destinations)
  "message": "..." // Optional message to pass along
}
```

The `agent` parameter is an enum of destination paths (exact strings from the `router.destinations` configuration).

### Router Example

**Router** (`router.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Customer service router
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
    - ./handlers/general.ai
maxTurns: 3
temperature: 0
---

You are a customer service router.

Analyze the user's request and route to the appropriate handler:
- `./handlers/billing.ai`: Payment, invoices, subscription issues
- `./handlers/technical.ai`: Product bugs, API issues, integration help
- `./handlers/general.ai`: Everything else

Use the `router__handoff-to` tool with the appropriate destination path.
```

**Destination** (`./handlers/billing.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Handles billing and payment issues
toolName: billing
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
tools:
  - stripe
---
You handle billing and payment issues.
```

### Router Best Practices

- Keep router agent **simple and fast** (few turns, simple logic)
- Use cheaper/faster models for routing decisions
- Provide clear routing criteria in the prompt
- Set low `temperature` for deterministic routing

---

## Handoff

Handoff runs an agent **after** the main session completes, for post-processing.

### Configuration

| Property     | Value                     |
| ------------ | ------------------------- |
| Type         | `string`                  |
| Default      | None (no handoff)         |
| Valid values | Single path to `.ai` file |

```yaml
---
handoff: ./formatters/report.ai
---
```

**Note**: Arrays are NOT supported. Only single handoff agent.

### How Handoff Works

1. Main session runs and produces output
2. Handoff agent receives:
   - Original user request
   - Main session's response
3. Handoff agent processes and produces final output
4. Handoff's output becomes the final response

### Execution Flow

```
User Request
     │
     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│    Main Session              │
└─────────────────────────────┘
              │
              ▼
         Response
              │
              ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│    Handoff Agent             │
│  (receives request +         │
│   main response)             │
└─────────────────────────────┘
              │
              ▼
       Final Response
```

### Handoff Example

**Main agent** (`research.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Research agent
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
tools:
  - brave
  - fetcher
handoff: ./formatters/executive-summary.ai
maxTurns: 15
---
Research the topic thoroughly. Gather data from multiple sources.
```

**Handoff agent** (`./formatters/executive-summary.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Creates executive summaries
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o
maxTurns: 3
temperature: 0.3
---

You receive research findings.

Create an executive summary:
1. Key takeaways (3-5 bullet points)
2. Main findings
3. Recommendations

Keep it concise and actionable.
```

### Handoff with Router

If the main agent uses router AND handoff:

1. Router agent runs
2. Router delegates to destination
3. Destination agent runs
4. Handoff receives destination's output
5. Handoff produces final output

```
Request → Router → Destination → Handoff → Final Response
```

### Handoff Best Practices

- Use for formatting, summarization, translation
- Keep handoff agents focused and fast
- Don't add new information in handoff (it receives all context)
- Single handoff only (no chaining via frontmatter)

---

## Combining Patterns

You can use multiple orchestration patterns together.

### Advisors + Main Session

```yaml
---
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance.ai
  - ./advisors/security.ai
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
---
```

Flow: Advisors → Main Session → Response

### Router + Destinations

```yaml
---
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
---
```

Flow: Request → Router → Selected Destination → Response

### Main + Handoff

```yaml
---
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
handoff: ./formatters/report.ai
---
```

Flow: Request → Main Session → Handoff → Final Response

### Full Pipeline: Advisors + Router + Handoff

```yaml
---
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance.ai
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
handoff: ./formatters/report.ai
---
```

Flow:

1. Advisors run (parallel)
2. Router runs (with advisor context)
3. Router selects destination
4. Destination runs
5. Handoff processes destination output
6. Final response

### Orchestration vs Sub-Agents

| Feature          | Orchestration             | Sub-Agents              |
| ---------------- | ------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| **When runs**    | Before/after main session | During main session     |
| **Control**      | Automatic (frontmatter)   | LLM decides (tool call) |
| **Relationship** | Pipeline stages           | On-demand delegation    |
| **Use case**     | Pre/post processing       | Task specialization     |

**Use orchestration when**:

- You need consistent pre/post processing
- Flow is deterministic
- Pattern is always applied

**Use sub-agents when**:

- LLM should decide when to delegate
- Multiple specialists available on-demand
- Dynamic task decomposition

---

## Common Patterns

### Compliance Gateway

All requests reviewed by compliance:

```yaml
---
description: Compliant assistant
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance-checker.ai
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
---
```

### Customer Service Router

Route to specialized handlers:

```yaml
---
description: Customer service entry point
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
    - ./handlers/sales.ai
    - ./handlers/general.ai
temperature: 0
maxTurns: 3
---
```

### Research with Executive Summary

Research followed by formatting:

```yaml
---
description: Research with summary
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
tools:
  - brave
handoff: ./formatters/executive-summary.ai
---
```

### Multi-Advisor Review

Multiple perspectives before response:

```yaml
---
description: Reviewed assistant
advisors:
  - ./advisors/legal.ai
  - ./advisors/security.ai
  - ./advisors/brand.ai
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
---
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### "Advisor failed but session continued"

**Expected behavior**: Advisor failures don't stop execution.

**If you need strict advisors**: Handle in the main agent's prompt:

```yaml
If compliance issues were identified, do not proceed.
```

### "router\_\_handoff-to not available"

**Problem**: Tool not appearing for router agent.

**Cause**: `router.destinations` not configured or empty.

**Solution**: Ensure destinations are defined:

```yaml
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/one.ai
    - ./handlers/two.ai
```

### "Invalid destination"

**Problem**: Router tries to hand off to unknown destination.

**Cause**: Destination path doesn't match any configured destination.

**Solution**: Check destination paths match the exact strings in `router.destinations`:

```yaml
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai # Use this exact path string
```

### "Handoff not receiving main response"

**Problem**: Handoff agent doesn't see main session output.

**Cause**: Main session failed or handoff misconfigured.

**Solution**: Check:

1. Main session completes successfully
2. Handoff path is correct
3. Single string (not array) for handoff

### "Multiple handoffs needed"

**Problem**: Want to chain multiple post-processors.

**Limitation**: Only single handoff supported in frontmatter.

**Workaround**: The handoff agent can have its own handoff:

```yaml
# main.ai
handoff: ./stage1.ai

# stage1.ai
handoff: ./stage2.ai
```

Or use sub-agents within handoff:

```yaml
# main.ai
handoff: ./post-processor.ai

# post-processor.ai
agents:
  - ./formatters/step1.ai
  - ./formatters/step2.ai
```

### Advisors Running Sequentially

**Problem**: Advisors seem slow, running one after another.

**Expected**: Advisors run in parallel.

**If slow**:

- Check advisor complexity
- Reduce advisor `maxTurns`
- Use faster models for advisors

---

## See Also

- [Agent-Files](Agent-Files) - Overview of .ai file structure
- [Agent-Files-Sub-Agents](Agent-Files-Sub-Agents) - On-demand agent delegation (tools)
- [Agent-Files-Contracts](Agent-Files-Contracts) - Input/output for orchestration agents
- [Technical-Specs-Session-Lifecycle](Technical-Specs-Session-Lifecycle) - How sessions execute

Commit message:

docs(wiki): GLM-4.7 accuracy review round 2 - 65 documentation corrections
Key fixes:
- Configuration-Parameters: Added missing provider properties (custom, mergeStrategy,
  openaiMode, reasoning*, toolChoice, contextWindowBufferTokens, telemetry, api, embed)
- Advanced-Extended-Reasoning: Corrected priority order, documented --default-reasoning
  behavior, fixed config file structure (options.reasoning vs defaults.reasoningValue)
- Operations-Exit-Codes: Updated examples to actual log format, expanded exit code 5
  to include max tool turns exceeded
- Technical-Specs-Context-Management: Added currentReasoningTokens counter, documented
  combined tokenization approach (Math.max), updated maxOutputTokens default to 16384
- Configuration-Caching: Changed cacheStrategy to caching (frontmatter/CLI option)
- Agent-Files-Sub-Agents: Added reserved tool names, corrected sub-agent input format
- Headends-OpenAI-Compatible: Added content array support, schema fallback docs,
  new troubleshooting sections for missing_model and missing_messages

All changes verified against source code by GLM-4.7 automated review.

docs/Agent-Files-Orchestration.md, after:

# Multi-Agent Orchestration

Configure advanced multi-agent patterns: advisors for pre-consultation, routers for dynamic delegation, and handoff for post-processing.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview) - What orchestration patterns enable
- [Quick Example](#quick-example) - Basic orchestration examples
- [Advisors](#advisors) - Pre-execution consultation
- [Router](#router) - Dynamic agent delegation
- [Handoff](#handoff) - Post-execution processing
- [Combining Patterns](#combining-patterns) - Using multiple patterns together
- [Common Patterns](#common-patterns) - Typical orchestration configurations
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) - Common mistakes and fixes
- [See Also](#see-also) - Related pages

---

## Overview

Orchestration patterns run **outside** the main session loop:

- **Advisors**: Run in parallel BEFORE the main session, inject context
- **Router**: Enables the main session to hand off to a destination agent
- **Handoff**: Runs AFTER the main session, post-processes the output

These differ from `agents` (sub-agents), which are tools called DURING the session.

**User questions answered**: "How do I set up advisors?" / "How do I route to different agents?"

---

## Quick Example

### Advisors

```yaml
---
description: Agent with compliance and security advisors
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance.ai
  - ./advisors/security.ai
---

[Advisor outputs are injected here automatically]

You help users with their requests while respecting compliance and security guidance.
```

### Router

```yaml
---
description: Customer service router
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
    - ./handlers/general.ai
maxTurns: 3
temperature: 0
---
Analyze the request and route to the appropriate handler.
Use `router__handoff-to` with the destination path.
```

### Handoff

```yaml
---
description: Research agent with formatting handoff
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
tools:
  - brave
handoff: ./formatters/report.ai
---
Research the topic thoroughly. Results will be formatted automatically.
```

---

## Advisors

Advisors are agents that run **before** the main session. Their outputs are injected as context for the main agent.

### Configuration

| Property     | Value                  |
| ------------ | ---------------------- |
| Type         | `string` or `string[]` |
| Default      | `[]` (no advisors)     |
| Valid values | Paths to `.ai` files   |

```yaml
---
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance.ai
  - ./advisors/security.ai
---
```

### How Advisors Work

1. All advisors run **in parallel** before the main session
2. Each advisor receives the user's prompt
3. Advisor outputs are collected
4. Outputs are injected as tagged XML blocks at the start of the user prompt
5. Main session runs with advisory blocks in the prompt

### Execution Flow

```
User Request
     │
     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│    Advisors (parallel)       │
│  ┌─────────┐  ┌─────────┐   │
│  │Compliance│  │Security │   │
│  └────┬────┘  └────┬────┘   │
│       │            │         │
│       ▼            ▼         │
│   [advice 1]   [advice 2]    │
└─────────────────────────────┘
              │
              ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│    Main Session              │
│  (with advisor context)      │
└─────────────────────────────┘
              │
              ▼
         Response
```

### Advisor Requirements

Advisors are regular `.ai` files. They should:

- Have a `description`
- Return useful advisory content (final_report or last assistant message)
- Be fast (they block the main session)

**Example advisor** (`./advisors/compliance.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Reviews requests for compliance issues
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
maxTurns: 3
temperature: 0
---

Review the user's request for compliance issues.

If issues found:
- List each issue briefly
- Suggest modifications

If no issues: respond "No compliance issues identified."
```

### Advisor Failure Handling

If an advisor fails:

- It becomes a synthetic advisory block with error info
- Main session still runs
- Failure does NOT stop execution

### Best Practices

- Keep advisors **fast** (low `maxTurns`, simple tasks)
- Use cheaper/faster models for advisors
- Design for parallel execution (no dependencies between advisors)
- Handle the case where advisor fails gracefully

---

## Router

Router pattern enables an agent to dynamically delegate to specialized handlers.

### Configuration

| Property | Value                                       |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| Type     | `object` with `destinations: string[]`      |
| Default  | None (no routing)                           |
| Required | `destinations` array with at least one path |

```yaml
---
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
    - ./handlers/general.ai
---
```

### How Router Works

1. Router agent receives the user's request
2. Router analyzes and decides which destination to use
3. Router calls `router__handoff-to` tool with the destination to declare intent
4. Orchestration layer executes the handoff after the router session completes
5. Destination agent takes over and produces the final response
6. Destination's response is merged into the overall result

### The router\_\_handoff-to Tool

When `router.destinations` is configured, a special tool becomes available:

**Tool**: `router__handoff-to`
**Input**:

```json
{
  "agent": "./handlers/billing.ai", // Destination path (exact string from router.destinations)
  "message": "..." // Optional message to pass along
}
```

The `agent` parameter is an enum of destination paths (exact strings from the `router.destinations` configuration).

### Router Example

**Router** (`router.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Customer service router
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
    - ./handlers/general.ai
maxTurns: 3
temperature: 0
---

You are a customer service router.

Analyze the user's request and route to the appropriate handler:
- `./handlers/billing.ai`: Payment, invoices, subscription issues
- `./handlers/technical.ai`: Product bugs, API issues, integration help
- `./handlers/general.ai`: Everything else

Use the `router__handoff-to` tool with the appropriate destination path.
```

**Destination** (`./handlers/billing.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Handles billing and payment issues
toolName: billing
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
tools:
  - stripe
---
You handle billing and payment issues.
```

### Router Best Practices

- Keep router agent **simple and fast** (few turns, simple logic)
- Use cheaper/faster models for routing decisions
- Provide clear routing criteria in the prompt
- Set low `temperature` for deterministic routing

---

## Handoff

Handoff runs an agent **after** the main session completes, for post-processing.

### Configuration

| Property     | Value                     |
| ------------ | ------------------------- |
| Type         | `string`                  |
| Default      | None (no handoff)         |
| Valid values | Single path to `.ai` file |

```yaml
---
handoff: ./formatters/report.ai
---
```

**Note**: Arrays are NOT supported. Only single handoff agent.

### How Handoff Works

1. Main session runs and produces output
2. Handoff agent receives:
   - Original user request
   - Main session's response
3. Handoff agent processes and produces final output
4. Handoff's output becomes the final response

### Execution Flow

```
User Request
     │
     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│    Main Session              │
└─────────────────────────────┘
              │
              ▼
         Response
              │
              ▼
┌─────────────────────────────┐
│    Handoff Agent             │
│  (receives request +         │
│   main response)             │
└─────────────────────────────┘
              │
              ▼
       Final Response
```

### Handoff Example

**Main agent** (`research.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Research agent
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
tools:
  - brave
  - fetcher
handoff: ./formatters/executive-summary.ai
maxTurns: 15
---
Research the topic thoroughly. Gather data from multiple sources.
```

**Handoff agent** (`./formatters/executive-summary.ai`):

```yaml
---
description: Creates executive summaries
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o
maxTurns: 3
temperature: 0.3
---

You receive research findings.

Create an executive summary:
1. Key takeaways (3-5 bullet points)
2. Main findings
3. Recommendations

Keep it concise and actionable.
```

### Handoff with Router

If the main agent uses router AND handoff:

1. Router agent runs
2. Router delegates to destination
3. Destination agent runs
4. Handoff receives destination's output
5. Handoff produces final output

```
Request → Router → Destination → Handoff → Final Response
```

### Handoff Best Practices

- Use for formatting, summarization, translation
- Keep handoff agents focused and fast
- Don't add new information in handoff (it receives all context)
- Single handoff only (no chaining via frontmatter)

---

## Combining Patterns

You can use multiple orchestration patterns together.

### Advisors + Main Session

```yaml
---
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance.ai
  - ./advisors/security.ai
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
---
```

Flow: Advisors → Main Session → Response

### Router + Destinations

```yaml
---
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
---
```

Flow: Request → Router → Selected Destination → Response

### Main + Handoff

```yaml
---
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
handoff: ./formatters/report.ai
---
```

Flow: Request → Main Session → Handoff → Final Response

### Full Pipeline: Advisors + Router + Handoff

```yaml
---
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance.ai
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
handoff: ./formatters/report.ai
---
```

Flow:

1. Advisors run (parallel)
2. Router runs (with advisor context)
3. Router selects destination
4. Destination runs
5. Handoff processes destination output
6. Final response

### Orchestration vs Sub-Agents

| Feature          | Orchestration             | Sub-Agents              |
| ---------------- | ------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| **When runs**    | Before/after main session | During main session     |
| **Control**      | Automatic (frontmatter)   | LLM decides (tool call) |
| **Relationship** | Pipeline stages           | On-demand delegation    |
| **Use case**     | Pre/post processing       | Task specialization     |

**Use orchestration when**:

- You need consistent pre/post processing
- Flow is deterministic
- Pattern is always applied

**Use sub-agents when**:

- LLM should decide when to delegate
- Multiple specialists available on-demand
- Dynamic task decomposition

---

## Common Patterns

### Compliance Gateway

All requests reviewed by compliance:

```yaml
---
description: Compliant assistant
advisors:
  - ./advisors/compliance-checker.ai
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
---
```

### Customer Service Router

Route to specialized handlers:

```yaml
---
description: Customer service entry point
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai
    - ./handlers/technical.ai
    - ./handlers/sales.ai
    - ./handlers/general.ai
temperature: 0
maxTurns: 3
---
```

### Research with Executive Summary

Research followed by formatting:

```yaml
---
description: Research with summary
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
tools:
  - brave
handoff: ./formatters/executive-summary.ai
---
```

### Multi-Advisor Review

Multiple perspectives before response:

```yaml
---
description: Reviewed assistant
advisors:
  - ./advisors/legal.ai
  - ./advisors/security.ai
  - ./advisors/brand.ai
models:
  - anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-20250514
---
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### "Advisor failed but session continued"

**Expected behavior**: Advisor failures don't stop execution.

**If you need strict advisors**: Handle in the main agent's prompt:

```yaml
If compliance issues were identified, do not proceed.
```

### "router\_\_handoff-to not available"

**Problem**: Tool not appearing for router agent.

**Cause**: `router.destinations` not configured or empty.

**Solution**: Ensure destinations are defined:

```yaml
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/one.ai
    - ./handlers/two.ai
```

### "Invalid destination"

**Problem**: Router tries to hand off to unknown destination.

**Cause**: Destination path doesn't match any configured destination.

**Solution**: Check destination paths match the exact strings in `router.destinations`:

```yaml
router:
  destinations:
    - ./handlers/billing.ai # Use this exact path string
```

### "Handoff not receiving main response"

**Problem**: Handoff agent doesn't see main session output.

**Cause**: Main session failed or handoff misconfigured.

**Solution**: Check:

1. Main session completes successfully
2. Handoff path is correct
3. Single string (not array) for handoff

### "Multiple handoffs needed"

**Problem**: Want to chain multiple post-processors.

**Limitation**: Only single handoff supported in frontmatter.

**Workaround**: The handoff agent can have its own handoff:

```yaml
# main.ai
handoff: ./stage1.ai

# stage1.ai
handoff: ./stage2.ai
```

Or use sub-agents within handoff:

```yaml
# main.ai
handoff: ./post-processor.ai

# post-processor.ai
agents:
  - ./formatters/step1.ai
  - ./formatters/step2.ai
```

### Advisors Running Sequentially

**Problem**: Advisors seem slow, running one after another.

**Expected**: Advisors run in parallel.

**If slow**:

- Check advisor complexity
- Reduce advisor `maxTurns`
- Use faster models for advisors

---

## See Also

- [Agent-Files](Agent-Files.md) - Overview of .ai file structure
- [Agent-Files-Sub-Agents](Agent-Files-Sub-Agents.md) - On-demand agent delegation (tools)
- [Agent-Files-Contracts](Agent-Files-Contracts.md) - Input/output for orchestration agents
- [Technical-Specs-Session-Lifecycle](Technical-Specs-Session-Lifecycle.md) - How sessions execute
