docs/Getting-Started-Installation.md, before:

# Installation

**Goal**: Install ai-agent on your system and verify it works.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) - What you need before installing
- [Installation Methods](#installation-methods) - Choose how to install
- [Configuration Setup](#configuration-setup) - Create required config files
- [Environment Variables](#environment-variables) - Set up API keys
- [Verification](#verification) - Confirm everything works
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) - Fix common issues
- [Next Steps](#next-steps) - Where to go after installation
- [See Also](#see-also) - Related documentation

---

## Prerequisites

Before installing ai-agent, ensure you have:

| Requirement | Minimum Version | How to Check     | Install Guide                                                 |
| ----------- | --------------- | ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Node.js** | 20+             | `node --version` | [nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org/)                             |
| **npm**     | 10+             | `npm --version`  | Comes with Node.js                                            |
| **Git**     | Any             | `git --version`  | [git-scm.com](https://git-scm.com/) (for source install only) |

**Check your versions:**

```bash
node --version && npm --version
```

**Expected output:**

```
v20.10.0
10.2.4
```

> **Note:** If Node.js is not installed or is an older version, download the LTS version from [nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org/).

---

## Installation Methods

### Global Installation (Recommended)

Install ai-agent globally for command-line use anywhere:

```bash
npm install -g ai-agent-claude
```

**Expected output:**

```
added 142 packages in 8s
```

**Verification:**

```bash
ai-agent --version
```

### Local Project Installation

Install as a project dependency:

```bash
cd your-project
npm install ai-agent-claude
```

Run via npx:

```bash
npx ai-agent-claude --agent hello.ai "Hello"
```

Or add to `package.json` scripts:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "agent": "ai-agent"
  }
}
```

Then run:

```bash
npm run agent -- --agent hello.ai "Hello"
```

### From Source (For Development)

Clone and build from source:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/netdata/ai-agent.git
cd ai-agent

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Build
npm run build

# Link globally (optional)
npm link
```

**Expected output after `npm run build`:**

```
> ai-agent@1.0.0 build
> tsc

Build complete
```

**Verification:**

```bash
# If you ran npm link:
ai-agent --version

# Otherwise, run from the dist directory:
node dist/cli.js --version
```

---

## Configuration Setup

ai-agent requires a configuration file to connect to LLM providers. Create one of these files:

### Configuration File Locations

ai-agent searches for configuration in this order:

| Priority | Location                                 | Use Case                |
| -------- | ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| 1        | `--config <file>` CLI option             | Override all defaults   |
| 2        | `.ai-agent.json` in current directory    | Project-specific config |
| 3        | `.ai-agent.json` in agent file directory | Agent-specific config   |
| 4        | `.ai-agent.json` in binary directory     | Binary-bundled config   |
| 5        | `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.json`              | User-wide config        |
| 6        | `/etc/ai-agent/ai-agent.json`            | System-wide config      |

### Minimal Configuration

Create `.ai-agent.json` in your working directory or `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.json` for user-wide config:

**For OpenAI:**

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "openai": {
      "type": "openai",
      "apiKey": "${OPENAI_API_KEY}"
    }
  }
}
```

**For Anthropic:**

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "anthropic": {
      "type": "anthropic",
      "apiKey": "${ANTHROPIC_API_KEY}"
    }
  }
}
```

**For multiple providers:**

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "openai": {
      "type": "openai",
      "apiKey": "${OPENAI_API_KEY}"
    },
    "anthropic": {
      "type": "anthropic",
      "apiKey": "${ANTHROPIC_API_KEY}"
    }
  }
}
```

> **Note:** The `${VAR}` syntax expands environment variables at runtime. Your API keys are never stored in the config file.

---

## Environment Variables

Store sensitive values like API keys in environment variables.

### Option 1: Export in Shell

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="sk-ant-..."
```

Add to your shell profile (`~/.bashrc`, `~/.zshrc`) for persistence:

```bash
echo 'export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
```

### Option 2: Environment File (Recommended)

ai-agent automatically loads `.ai-agent.env` from the same locations as configuration files:

- `.ai-agent.env` in current directory
- `.ai-agent.env` in agent file directory
- `.ai-agent.env` in binary directory
- `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.env` (user-wide)
- `/etc/ai-agent/ai-agent.env` (system-wide)

Create `.ai-agent.env` in your working directory or `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.env` for user-wide config:

```bash
# API Keys
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-...

# Optional: MCP server keys
BRAVE_API_KEY=...
GITHUB_TOKEN=ghp_...
```

ai-agent automatically loads these files on startup, with higher-priority locations overriding lower-priority ones.

> **Security:** Add `.ai-agent.env` to your `.gitignore` to prevent committing secrets.

### Verify Environment Variables

```bash
# Check if variable is set
echo $OPENAI_API_KEY
```

**Expected output:**

```
sk-... (your key)
```

---

## Verification

Run these tests to confirm ai-agent is installed and configured correctly.

### Test 1: Version Check

```bash
ai-agent --version
# or
ai-agent -V
```

**Expected:** Version number displayed (e.g., `ai-agent v1.0.0`)

### Test 2: Help Output

```bash
ai-agent --help
```

**Expected:** Help message with available options

### Test 3: Configuration Validation

Create a test agent file `test.ai`:

```yaml
#!/usr/bin/env ai-agent
---
description: Installation test agent
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
maxTurns: 1
---
Say "Installation successful!" and nothing else.
```

Run with `--dry-run` to validate without calling the LLM:

```bash
ai-agent --agent test.ai --dry-run "test"
```

**Expected output:**

```
dry run complete: configuration and MCP servers validated
```

### Test 4: Live API Call

Run the test agent without `--dry-run`:

```bash
ai-agent --agent test.ai "test"
```

**Expected output:**

```
Installation successful!
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### "command not found: ai-agent"

**Cause:** Global npm binaries not in PATH.

**Solutions:**

1. Find npm global bin directory:

   ```bash
   npm config get prefix
   ```

2. Add to PATH (replace `/usr/local` with your prefix):

   ```bash
   export PATH="$PATH:/usr/local/bin"
   ```

3. Or use npx:
   ```bash
   npx ai-agent --version
   ```

### "No providers configured"

**Cause:** Configuration file not found.

**Solution:** Create `.ai-agent.json` in your current directory or `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.json`. See [Configuration Setup](#configuration-setup).

### "API key not set" or "401 Unauthorized"

**Cause:** Environment variable not set or invalid key.

**Solutions:**

1. Verify the variable is exported:

   ```bash
   echo $OPENAI_API_KEY
   ```

2. If empty, export it:

   ```bash
   export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
   ```

3. Verify the key is valid in your provider's dashboard

### "ENOENT: no such file or directory"

**Cause:** Agent file not found.

**Solution:** Check the file path is correct:

```bash
ls -la test.ai  # Verify file exists
ai-agent --agent ./test.ai "test"  # Use explicit path
```

### npm install fails with permission errors

**Cause:** npm global directory needs elevated permissions.

**Solutions:**

1. Use a Node version manager (recommended):
   - [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) for Linux/macOS
   - [nvm-windows](https://github.com/coreybutler/nvm-windows) for Windows

2. Or configure npm to use a user directory:
   ```bash
   mkdir ~/.npm-global
   npm config set prefix '~/.npm-global'
   export PATH="$PATH:~/.npm-global/bin"
   ```

---

## Next Steps

Installation complete. Continue with:

| Goal                          | Page                                                           |
| ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Run your first agent          | [Quick Start](Getting-Started-Quick-Start)                     |
| Build a real-world agent      | [First Agent Tutorial](Getting-Started-First-Agent)            |
| Learn all environment options | [Environment Variables](Getting-Started-Environment-Variables) |
| Configure multiple providers  | [Configuration Providers](Configuration-Providers)             |

---

## See Also

- [Getting Started](Getting-Started) - Chapter overview
- [Quick Start](Getting-Started-Quick-Start) - Your first agent in 5 minutes
- [Configuration](Configuration) - Deep dive into configuration options
- [Configuration Files](Configuration-Files) - File resolution and layering
- [Operations Troubleshooting](Operations-Troubleshooting) - More troubleshooting solutions

Commit message:

docs(wiki): GLM-4.7 accuracy review round 2 - 65 documentation corrections
Key fixes:
- Configuration-Parameters: Added missing provider properties (custom, mergeStrategy,
  openaiMode, reasoning*, toolChoice, contextWindowBufferTokens, telemetry, api, embed)
- Advanced-Extended-Reasoning: Corrected priority order, documented --default-reasoning
  behavior, fixed config file structure (options.reasoning vs defaults.reasoningValue)
- Operations-Exit-Codes: Updated examples to actual log format, expanded exit code 5
  to include max tool turns exceeded
- Technical-Specs-Context-Management: Added currentReasoningTokens counter, documented
  combined tokenization approach (Math.max), updated maxOutputTokens default to 16384
- Configuration-Caching: Changed cacheStrategy to caching (frontmatter/CLI option)
- Agent-Files-Sub-Agents: Added reserved tool names, corrected sub-agent input format
- Headends-OpenAI-Compatible: Added content array support, schema fallback docs,
  new troubleshooting sections for missing_model and missing_messages

All changes verified against source code by GLM-4.7 automated review.

docs/Getting-Started-Installation.md, after:

# Installation

**Goal**: Install ai-agent on your system and verify it works.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) - What you need before installing
- [Installation Methods](#installation-methods) - Choose how to install
- [Configuration Setup](#configuration-setup) - Create required config files
- [Environment Variables](#environment-variables) - Set up API keys
- [Verification](#verification) - Confirm everything works
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) - Fix common issues
- [Next Steps](#next-steps) - Where to go after installation
- [See Also](#see-also) - Related documentation

---

## Prerequisites

Before installing ai-agent, ensure you have:

| Requirement | Minimum Version | How to Check     | Install Guide                                                 |
| ----------- | --------------- | ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Node.js** | 20+             | `node --version` | [nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org/)                             |
| **npm**     | 10+             | `npm --version`  | Comes with Node.js                                            |
| **Git**     | Any             | `git --version`  | [git-scm.com](https://git-scm.com/) (for source install only) |

**Check your versions:**

```bash
node --version && npm --version
```

**Expected output:**

```
v20.10.0
10.2.4
```

> **Note:** If Node.js is not installed or is an older version, download the LTS version from [nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org/).

---

## Installation Methods

### Global Installation (Recommended)

Install ai-agent globally for command-line use anywhere:

```bash
npm install -g ai-agent-claude
```

**Expected output:**

```
added 142 packages in 8s
```

**Verification:**

```bash
ai-agent --version
```

### Local Project Installation

Install as a project dependency:

```bash
cd your-project
npm install ai-agent-claude
```

Run via npx:

```bash
npx ai-agent-claude --agent hello.ai "Hello"
```

Or add to `package.json` scripts:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "agent": "ai-agent"
  }
}
```

Then run:

```bash
npm run agent -- --agent hello.ai "Hello"
```

### From Source (For Development)

Clone and build from source:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/netdata/ai-agent.git
cd ai-agent

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Build
npm run build

# Link globally (optional)
npm link
```

**Expected output after `npm run build`:**

```
> ai-agent@1.0.0 build
> tsc

Build complete
```

**Verification:**

```bash
# If you ran npm link:
ai-agent --version

# Otherwise, run from the dist directory:
node dist/cli.js --version
```

---

## Configuration Setup

ai-agent requires a configuration file to connect to LLM providers. Create one of these files:

### Configuration File Locations

ai-agent searches for configuration in this order:

| Priority | Location                                 | Use Case                |
| -------- | ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| 1        | `--config <file>` CLI option             | Override all defaults   |
| 2        | `.ai-agent.json` in current directory    | Project-specific config |
| 3        | `.ai-agent.json` in agent file directory | Agent-specific config   |
| 4        | `.ai-agent.json` in binary directory     | Binary-bundled config   |
| 5        | `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.json`              | User-wide config        |
| 6        | `/etc/ai-agent/ai-agent.json`            | System-wide config      |

### Minimal Configuration

Create `.ai-agent.json` in your working directory or `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.json` for user-wide config:

**For OpenAI:**

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "openai": {
      "type": "openai",
      "apiKey": "${OPENAI_API_KEY}"
    }
  }
}
```

**For Anthropic:**

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "anthropic": {
      "type": "anthropic",
      "apiKey": "${ANTHROPIC_API_KEY}"
    }
  }
}
```

**For multiple providers:**

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "openai": {
      "type": "openai",
      "apiKey": "${OPENAI_API_KEY}"
    },
    "anthropic": {
      "type": "anthropic",
      "apiKey": "${ANTHROPIC_API_KEY}"
    }
  }
}
```

> **Note:** The `${VAR}` syntax expands environment variables at runtime. Your API keys are never stored in the config file.

---

## Environment Variables

Store sensitive values like API keys in environment variables.

### Option 1: Export in Shell

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="sk-ant-..."
```

Add to your shell profile (`~/.bashrc`, `~/.zshrc`) for persistence:

```bash
echo 'export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
```

### Option 2: Environment File (Recommended)

ai-agent automatically loads `.ai-agent.env` from the same locations as configuration files:

- `.ai-agent.env` in current directory
- `.ai-agent.env` in agent file directory
- `.ai-agent.env` in binary directory
- `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.env` (user-wide)
- `/etc/ai-agent/ai-agent.env` (system-wide)

Create `.ai-agent.env` in your working directory or `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.env` for user-wide config:

```bash
# API Keys
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-...

# Optional: MCP server keys
BRAVE_API_KEY=...
GITHUB_TOKEN=ghp_...
```

ai-agent loads these files during configuration discovery. Each file provides variables for configuration at that location's priority layer; values from higher-priority files do not cascade to lower-priority files.

> **Security:** Add `.ai-agent.env` to your `.gitignore` to prevent committing secrets.

### Verify Environment Variables

```bash
# Check if variable is set
echo $OPENAI_API_KEY
```

**Expected output:**

```
sk-... (your key)
```

---

## Verification

Run these tests to confirm ai-agent is installed and configured correctly.

### Test 1: Version Check

```bash
ai-agent --version
# or
ai-agent -V
```

**Expected:** Version number displayed (e.g., `ai-agent v1.0.0`)

### Test 2: Help Output

```bash
ai-agent --help
```

**Expected:** Help message with available options

### Test 3: Configuration Validation

Create a test agent file `test.ai`:

```yaml
#!/usr/bin/env ai-agent
---
description: Installation test agent
models:
  - openai/gpt-4o-mini
maxTurns: 1
---
Say "Installation successful!" and nothing else.
```

Run with `--dry-run` to validate without calling the LLM:

```bash
ai-agent --agent test.ai --dry-run "test"
```

**Expected output:**

```
dry run complete: configuration and MCP servers validated
```

### Test 4: Live API Call

Run the test agent without `--dry-run`:

```bash
ai-agent --agent test.ai "test"
```

**Expected output:**

```
Installation successful!
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### "command not found: ai-agent"

**Cause:** Global npm binaries not in PATH.

**Solutions:**

1. Find npm global bin directory:

   ```bash
   npm config get prefix
   ```

2. Add to PATH (replace `/usr/local` with your prefix):

   ```bash
   export PATH="$PATH:/usr/local/bin"
   ```

3. Or use npx:
   ```bash
   npx ai-agent --version
   ```

### "No providers configured"

**Cause:** Configuration file not found.

**Solution:** Create `.ai-agent.json` in your current directory or `~/.ai-agent/ai-agent.json`. See [Configuration Setup](#configuration-setup).

### "API key not set" or "401 Unauthorized"

**Cause:** Environment variable not set or invalid key.

**Solutions:**

1. Verify the variable is exported:

   ```bash
   echo $OPENAI_API_KEY
   ```

2. If empty, export it:

   ```bash
   export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
   ```

3. Verify the key is valid in your provider's dashboard

### "ENOENT: no such file or directory"

**Cause:** Agent file not found.

**Solution:** Check the file path is correct:

```bash
ls -la test.ai  # Verify file exists
ai-agent --agent ./test.ai "test"  # Use explicit path
```

### npm install fails with permission errors

**Cause:** npm global directory needs elevated permissions.

**Solutions:**

1. Use a Node version manager (recommended):
   - [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) for Linux/macOS
   - [nvm-windows](https://github.com/coreybutler/nvm-windows) for Windows

2. Or configure npm to use a user directory:
   ```bash
   mkdir ~/.npm-global
   npm config set prefix '~/.npm-global'
   export PATH="$PATH:~/.npm-global/bin"
   ```

---

## Next Steps

Installation complete. Continue with:

| Goal                          | Page                                                           |
| ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Run your first agent          | [Quick Start](Getting-Started-Quick-Start)                     |
| Build a real-world agent      | [First Agent Tutorial](Getting-Started-First-Agent)            |
| Learn all environment options | [Environment Variables](Getting-Started-Environment-Variables) |
| Configure multiple providers  | [Configuration Providers](Configuration-Providers)             |

---

## See Also

- [Getting Started](Getting-Started) - Chapter overview
- [Quick Start](Getting-Started-Quick-Start) - Your first agent in 5 minutes
- [Configuration](Configuration) - Deep dive into configuration options
- [Configuration Files](Configuration-Files) - File resolution and layering
- [Operations Troubleshooting](Operations-Troubleshooting) - More troubleshooting solutions
