docs/nodes-ephemerality.md, before:

# Nodes Ephemerality in Netdata

## Node Types

Netdata categorizes nodes into two types:

| Type          | Description                                    | Common Use Cases                                                                                                                                                         |
|---------------|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Ephemeral** | Expected to disconnect or reconnect frequently | - Auto-scaling cloud instances<br/>- Dynamic containers and VMs<br/>- IoT devices with intermittent connectivity<br/>- Development/test environments with frequent restarts |
| **Permanent** | Expected to maintain continuous connectivity   | - Production servers<br/>- Core infrastructure nodes<br/>- Critical monitoring systems<br/>- Stable database servers                                                        |

> **Note:** Disconnections in permanent nodes indicate potential system failures and require immediate attention.

### Key Benefits

1. **Reduced Alert Noise**: Disconnection alerts now apply only to permanent nodes, helping teams focus on actual issues.
2. **Improved Dynamic Infrastructure Support**: Auto-scaling cloud instances, containers, and other temporary resources can be designated as ephemeral to prevent unnecessary alerts.
3. **Automated Node Cleanup**: Ephemeral nodes are removed based on configurable retention periods, keeping dashboards relevant and uncluttered.

## Configuring Ephemeral Nodes

By default, Netdata treats all nodes as permanent. To mark a node as ephemeral:

1. Open the `netdata.conf` file on the target node.
2. Add the following configuration:
   ```ini
   [global]
     is ephemeral node = yes
   ```
3. Restart the node.

This setting applies the `_is_ephemeral` host label, which propagates to Netdata Parents and Netdata Cloud.

## Alerts for Parent Nodes

Netdata v2.3.0 introduces two new alerts specifically for permanent nodes:

| Alert                       | Trigger Condition                                         |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| `streaming_never_connected` | A permanent node has never connected to a Netdata Parent. |
| `streaming_disconnected`    | A previously connected permanent node has disconnected.   |

## Monitoring Child Node Status

To investigate an alert:

1. Open the `Top` tab in your Netdata dashboard.
2. Select the `Netdata-streaming` function.
3. Review the node status table:
    - **Red lines**: Connection issues when nodes attempt to connect to a Parent.
    - **Yellow lines**: Restreaming issues when a Parent streams data to another Parent.
    - **Color highlighting applies only to permanent nodes**.
    - Use the `Ephemerality` filter to view only permanent nodes.
    - Check `InStatus`, `InReason`, and `InAge` for incoming connection status.
    - Check `OutStatus`, `OutReason`, and `OutAge` for outgoing streaming status.

## Managing Offline Nodes

To clear alerts for permanently offline nodes, run:

```bash
netdatacli mark-stale-nodes-ephemeral <node_id | machine_guid | hostname | ALL_NODES>
```

> **Note:** Nodes will revert to permanent status if they reconnect unless explicitly configured as ephemeral in `netdata.conf`.

## Cloud Integration

From v2.3.0 onward, Netdata Cloud sends unreachable-node notifications **only for permanent nodes**, reducing unnecessary alerts.

## Automatically Removing Ephemeral Nodes

By default, Netdata does not automatically remove disconnected ephemeral nodes. To enable automatic cleanup:

1. Open the `netdata.conf` file on Netdata Parent nodes.
2. Add the following configuration:
   ```ini
   [db]
     cleanup ephemeral hosts after = 1d
   ```
3. Restart the node.

This setting removes ephemeral nodes from queries after 24 hours of disconnection. Once all parent nodes remove a node, Netdata Cloud automatically deletes it as well.

Commit message:

Improve ephemerality docs, adding `remove-stale-node`

docs/nodes-ephemerality.md, after:

# Nodes Ephemerality in Netdata

## Node Types

Netdata categorizes nodes into two types:

| Type          | Description                                    | Common Use Cases                                                                                                                                                         |
|---------------|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Ephemeral** | Expected to disconnect or reconnect frequently | - Auto-scaling cloud instances<br/>- Dynamic containers and VMs<br/>- IoT devices with intermittent connectivity<br/>- Development/test environments with frequent restarts |
| **Permanent** | Expected to maintain continuous connectivity   | - Production servers<br/>- Core infrastructure nodes<br/>- Critical monitoring systems<br/>- Stable database servers                                                        |

> **Note:** Disconnections in permanent nodes indicate potential system failures and require immediate attention.

### Key Benefits

1. **Reduced Alert Noise**: Disconnection alerts now apply only to permanent nodes, helping teams focus on actual issues.
2. **Improved Dynamic Infrastructure Support**: Auto-scaling cloud instances, containers, and other temporary resources can be designated as ephemeral to prevent unnecessary alerts.
3. **Automated Node Cleanup**: Ephemeral nodes are removed based on configurable retention periods, keeping dashboards relevant and uncluttered.

## Configuring Ephemeral Nodes

By default, Netdata treats all nodes as permanent. To mark a node as ephemeral:

1. Open the `netdata.conf` file on the target node.
2. Add the following configuration:
   ```ini
   [global]
     is ephemeral node = yes
   ```
3. Restart the node.

This setting applies the `_is_ephemeral` host label, which propagates to Netdata Parents and Netdata Cloud.

## Alerts for Parent Nodes

Netdata v2.3.0 introduces two new alerts specifically for permanent nodes:

| Alert                       | Trigger Condition                                         |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| `streaming_never_connected` | A permanent node has never connected to a Netdata Parent. |
| `streaming_disconnected`    | A previously connected permanent node has disconnected.   |

## Monitoring Child Node Status

To investigate an alert:

1. Open the `Top` tab in your Netdata dashboard.
2. Select the `Netdata-streaming` function.
3. Review the node status table:
    - **Red lines**: Connection issues when nodes attempt to connect to a Parent.
    - **Yellow lines**: Restreaming issues when a Parent streams data to another Parent.
    - **Color highlighting applies only to permanent nodes**.
    - Use the `Ephemerality` filter to view only permanent nodes.
    - Check `InStatus`, `InReason`, and `InAge` for incoming connection status.
    - Check `OutStatus`, `OutReason`, and `OutAge` for outgoing streaming status.

## Managing Offline Nodes

The [Netdata CLI](/src/cli/README.md) tool has two commands for working with archived nodes.

### mark-stale-nodes-ephemeral

To mark a permanently offline nodes, including virtual nodes, as ephemeral:
```bash
netdatacli mark-stale-nodes-ephemeral <node_id | machine_guid | hostname | ALL_NODES>
```
This keeps the previously collected metrics data available for querying, and also clears any active alerts.

> **Note:** Nodes will revert to permanent status if they reconnect unless explicitly configured as ephemeral in `netdata.conf`.

### remove-stale-node

To fully remove permanently offline nodes:

```bash
netdatacli remove-stale-node <node_id | machine_guid | hostname | ALL_NODES>
```

This is like the `mark-stale-nodes-ephemeral` subcommand, but also removes the node so that they are no longer available for querying.

## Cloud Integration

From v2.3.0 onward, Netdata Cloud sends unreachable-node notifications **only for permanent nodes**, reducing unnecessary alerts.

Ephemeral nodes in Netdata Cloud are considered stale as long as there is at least one Agent reporting that, for that node, it has metrics data available for querying, by signaling the node as stale. When all Agents report the node as offline, ephemeral nodes are deleted from Cloud as well.

## Automatically Removing Ephemeral Nodes

By default, Netdata does not automatically remove disconnected ephemeral nodes. To enable automatic cleanup:

1. Open the `netdata.conf` file on Netdata Parent nodes.
2. Add the following configuration:
   ```ini
   [db]
     cleanup ephemeral hosts after = 1d
   ```
3. Restart the node.

This setting removes ephemeral nodes from queries after 24 hours of disconnection. Once all parent nodes remove a node, Netdata Cloud automatically deletes it as well.
