docs/specs/tools-progress-report.md, before:

# progress_report Tool

## TL;DR
Optional tool for reporting intermediate status during execution. Updates session title and emits progress events. Enabled only when external tools or subagents present. In XML transport, progress uses the XML slot alongside final-report; provider tool list is hidden so the model must emit the XML tag.

## Source Files
- `src/tools/internal-provider.ts` - Tool definition and handler
- `src/ai-agent.ts:598-600` - Enablement logic
- `src/ai-agent.ts:624-657` - updateStatus callback
- `src/ai-agent.ts:659-677` - setTitle callback

## Tool Definition

**Name**: `agent__progress_report`
**Short Name**: `progress_report`

### Input Schema
```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "progress": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Current status message"
    },
    "title": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Optional session title"
    },
    "emoji": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Optional emoji for title"
    }
  },
  "required": ["progress"]
}
```

## Enablement Conditions

**Location**: `src/ai-agent.ts:598-600`

```typescript
const hasNonInternalDeclaredTools = declaredTools.some((toolName) => {
  // Check if not batch, progress_report, or final_report
  return true; // Has external tools
});
const hasSubAgentsConfigured = Array.isArray(this.sessionConfig.subAgents) && this.sessionConfig.subAgents.length > 0;
const wantsProgressUpdates = this.sessionConfig.headendWantsProgressUpdates !== false;
const enableProgressTool = wantsProgressUpdates && (hasNonInternalDeclaredTools || hasSubAgentsConfigured);
```

**Summary**: Enabled when:
1. `headendWantsProgressUpdates !== false`
2. AND (has external tools OR has subagents)

## Execution Flow

### XML Transport
- When `tooling.transport` is `xml`, progress updates are sent via `<ai-agent-NONCE-XXXX tool="agent__progress_report">text</ai-agent-NONCE-XXXX>` using the slots declared in XML-NEXT; native `tool_calls` are dropped in this mode. Progress is suppressed in `xml-final`.

### 1. Status Update
**Location**: `src/ai-agent.ts:624-657`

```typescript
updateStatus: (text: string) => {
  const t = text.trim();
  if (t.length > 0) {
    // Update opTree status
    this.opTree.setLatestStatus(t);

    // Emit opTree update
    this.sessionConfig.callbacks?.onOpTree?.(this.opTree.getSession());

    // Log progress
    const entry: LogEntry = {
      severity: 'VRB',
      type: 'tool',
      remoteIdentifier: 'agent:progress',
      bold: true,
      message: `[PROGRESS UPDATE] ${t}`,
    };
    this.log(entry);

    // Emit progress event
    this.progressReporter.agentUpdate({
      message: t,
      // ...trace context
    });
  }
}
```

### 2. Title Update (Optional)
**Location**: `src/ai-agent.ts:659-677`

```typescript
setTitle: (title: string, emoji?: string) => {
  const clean = title.trim();
  if (clean.length === 0) return;

  this.sessionTitle = { title: clean, emoji, ts: Date.now() };
  this.opTree.setSessionTitle(clean);

  const entry: LogEntry = {
    severity: 'VRB',
    type: 'tool',
    remoteIdentifier: 'agent:title',
    bold: true,
    message: emoji ? `${emoji} ${clean}` : clean,
  };
  this.log(entry);
}
```

## Tool Response

**Success Response**:
```
Progress update recorded: [status message]
```

## Session State Updates

### OpTree
- `setLatestStatus(text)` - Update current status
- `setSessionTitle(title)` - Update session title

### Progress Events
- `agent_update` event emitted via progressReporter
- Contains: callPath, agentId, agentPath, message, trace context

### Logs
- VRB severity
- Bold emphasis
- Remote identifier: `agent:progress` or `agent:title`

## Use Cases

### Long-Running Tasks
```json
{
  "progress": "Searching documentation for API endpoints..."
}
```

### Multi-Step Operations
```json
{
  "progress": "Step 2/5: Analyzing code dependencies"
}
```

### Session Labeling
```json
{
  "progress": "Starting research",
  "title": "API Documentation Research",
  "emoji": "📚"
}
```

## Configuration Effects

| Setting | Effect |
|---------|--------|
| `headendWantsProgressUpdates` | Master enable/disable |
| `tools` | External tools trigger enablement |
| `subAgents` | Sub-agents trigger enablement |

## Telemetry

**Progress Events Include**:
- Timestamp
- Message text
- Agent context (callPath, agentId)
- Transaction IDs

## Logging

**Status Update Log**:
```
[VRB] agent:progress - [PROGRESS UPDATE] Current status message
```

**Title Update Log**:
```
[VRB] agent:title - 📚 Session Title
```

## Events

- `agent_update` - Progress event emitted
- OpTree snapshot update via callback

## Invariants

1. **Optional tool**: May not be available
2. **Non-blocking**: Does not affect execution flow
3. **Idempotent**: Multiple calls are safe
4. **Empty check**: Empty strings ignored

## Business Logic Coverage (Verified 2025-11-16)

- **Conditional enablement**: The tool is only registered when `headendWantsProgressUpdates !== false` *and* the agent exposes external tools or subagents, preventing progress spam for simple prompts (`src/ai-agent.ts:598-610`).
- **OpTree + headend sync**: Every status/title update pushes a new opTree snapshot via `callbacks.onOpTree`, so Slack/REST/OpenAI headends can render progress bars in real time (`src/ai-agent.ts:624-677`).
- **Final-turn guard**: The internal provider warns if `progress_report` is called in the same turn as `final_report` so models learn to separate updates from final answers (`src/tools/internal-provider.ts:172-197`).

## Test Coverage

**Phase 1**:
- Tool enablement logic
- Status update propagation
- Title setting
- Event emission

**Gaps**:
- High-frequency update performance
- Emoji handling edge cases
- Concurrent update scenarios

## Troubleshooting

### Tool not available
- Check tool enablement conditions
- Verify external tools or subagents present
- Check headendWantsProgressUpdates setting

### Status not appearing
- Check text is non-empty after trim
- Verify opTree callback registered
- Check log filtering

### Title not updating
- Check title is non-empty
- Verify setSessionTitle callback
- Check opTree state

### Events not received
- Check progressReporter initialized
- Verify onProgress callback registered
- Check event propagation

Commit message:

3-layer final report processing and xml-final progress fix
- Implement 3-layer architecture for final report processing:
  Layer 1: Transport/wrapper extraction (status, format from XML attrs)
  Layer 2: Format-specific processing (sub-agent=passthrough, json=validate, etc)
  Layer 3: Clean final report construction

- Fix xml-final mode: progress follows tools transport (native), not suppressed
  LLMs cannot produce text + tools in same turn, so progress must be a tool

- Extract status/format attributes from XML tags separately from payload
- Add _rawPayload internal field for XML transport
- sub-agent format is now opaque blob (no validation, no parsing)

- Update docs: CONTRACT.md, DESIGN.md, specs/tools-*.md

docs/specs/tools-progress-report.md, after:

# progress_report Tool

## TL;DR
Optional tool for reporting intermediate status during execution. Updates session title and emits progress events. Enabled only when external tools or subagents present. In `xml` transport, progress uses the XML slot (`NONCE-PROGRESS`); in `xml-final` transport, progress follows tools transport (native tool_calls).

## Source Files
- `src/tools/internal-provider.ts` - Tool definition and handler
- `src/ai-agent.ts:598-600` - Enablement logic
- `src/ai-agent.ts:624-657` - updateStatus callback
- `src/ai-agent.ts:659-677` - setTitle callback

## Tool Definition

**Name**: `agent__progress_report`
**Short Name**: `progress_report`

### Input Schema
```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "progress": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Current status message"
    },
    "title": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Optional session title"
    },
    "emoji": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Optional emoji for title"
    }
  },
  "required": ["progress"]
}
```

## Enablement Conditions

**Location**: `src/ai-agent.ts:598-600`

```typescript
const hasNonInternalDeclaredTools = declaredTools.some((toolName) => {
  // Check if not batch, progress_report, or final_report
  return true; // Has external tools
});
const hasSubAgentsConfigured = Array.isArray(this.sessionConfig.subAgents) && this.sessionConfig.subAgents.length > 0;
const wantsProgressUpdates = this.sessionConfig.headendWantsProgressUpdates !== false;
const enableProgressTool = wantsProgressUpdates && (hasNonInternalDeclaredTools || hasSubAgentsConfigured);
```

**Summary**: Enabled when:
1. `headendWantsProgressUpdates !== false`
2. AND (has external tools OR has subagents)

## Execution Flow

### XML Transport
- When `tooling.transport` is `xml`, progress updates are sent via `<ai-agent-NONCE-PROGRESS tool="agent__progress_report">text</ai-agent-NONCE-PROGRESS>` using the dedicated progress slot in XML-NEXT; native `tool_calls` are ignored in this mode.
- When `tooling.transport` is `xml-final`, progress follows tools transport (native tool_calls) since LLMs cannot produce both text output and tool calls in the same turn—progress must be a tool to be usable.

### 1. Status Update
**Location**: `src/ai-agent.ts:624-657`

```typescript
updateStatus: (text: string) => {
  const t = text.trim();
  if (t.length > 0) {
    // Update opTree status
    this.opTree.setLatestStatus(t);

    // Emit opTree update
    this.sessionConfig.callbacks?.onOpTree?.(this.opTree.getSession());

    // Log progress
    const entry: LogEntry = {
      severity: 'VRB',
      type: 'tool',
      remoteIdentifier: 'agent:progress',
      bold: true,
      message: `[PROGRESS UPDATE] ${t}`,
    };
    this.log(entry);

    // Emit progress event
    this.progressReporter.agentUpdate({
      message: t,
      // ...trace context
    });
  }
}
```

### 2. Title Update (Optional)
**Location**: `src/ai-agent.ts:659-677`

```typescript
setTitle: (title: string, emoji?: string) => {
  const clean = title.trim();
  if (clean.length === 0) return;

  this.sessionTitle = { title: clean, emoji, ts: Date.now() };
  this.opTree.setSessionTitle(clean);

  const entry: LogEntry = {
    severity: 'VRB',
    type: 'tool',
    remoteIdentifier: 'agent:title',
    bold: true,
    message: emoji ? `${emoji} ${clean}` : clean,
  };
  this.log(entry);
}
```

## Tool Response

**Success Response**:
```
Progress update recorded: [status message]
```

## Session State Updates

### OpTree
- `setLatestStatus(text)` - Update current status
- `setSessionTitle(title)` - Update session title

### Progress Events
- `agent_update` event emitted via progressReporter
- Contains: callPath, agentId, agentPath, message, trace context

### Logs
- VRB severity
- Bold emphasis
- Remote identifier: `agent:progress` or `agent:title`

## Use Cases

### Long-Running Tasks
```json
{
  "progress": "Searching documentation for API endpoints..."
}
```

### Multi-Step Operations
```json
{
  "progress": "Step 2/5: Analyzing code dependencies"
}
```

### Session Labeling
```json
{
  "progress": "Starting research",
  "title": "API Documentation Research",
  "emoji": "📚"
}
```

## Configuration Effects

| Setting | Effect |
|---------|--------|
| `headendWantsProgressUpdates` | Master enable/disable |
| `tools` | External tools trigger enablement |
| `subAgents` | Sub-agents trigger enablement |

## Telemetry

**Progress Events Include**:
- Timestamp
- Message text
- Agent context (callPath, agentId)
- Transaction IDs

## Logging

**Status Update Log**:
```
[VRB] agent:progress - [PROGRESS UPDATE] Current status message
```

**Title Update Log**:
```
[VRB] agent:title - 📚 Session Title
```

## Events

- `agent_update` - Progress event emitted
- OpTree snapshot update via callback

## Invariants

1. **Optional tool**: May not be available
2. **Non-blocking**: Does not affect execution flow
3. **Idempotent**: Multiple calls are safe
4. **Empty check**: Empty strings ignored

## Business Logic Coverage (Verified 2025-11-16)

- **Conditional enablement**: The tool is only registered when `headendWantsProgressUpdates !== false` *and* the agent exposes external tools or subagents, preventing progress spam for simple prompts (`src/ai-agent.ts:598-610`).
- **OpTree + headend sync**: Every status/title update pushes a new opTree snapshot via `callbacks.onOpTree`, so Slack/REST/OpenAI headends can render progress bars in real time (`src/ai-agent.ts:624-677`).
- **Final-turn guard**: The internal provider warns if `progress_report` is called in the same turn as `final_report` so models learn to separate updates from final answers (`src/tools/internal-provider.ts:172-197`).

## Test Coverage

**Phase 1**:
- Tool enablement logic
- Status update propagation
- Title setting
- Event emission

**Gaps**:
- High-frequency update performance
- Emoji handling edge cases
- Concurrent update scenarios

## Troubleshooting

### Tool not available
- Check tool enablement conditions
- Verify external tools or subagents present
- Check headendWantsProgressUpdates setting

### Status not appearing
- Check text is non-empty after trim
- Verify opTree callback registered
- Check log filtering

### Title not updating
- Check title is non-empty
- Verify setSessionTitle callback
- Check opTree state

### Events not received
- Check progressReporter initialized
- Verify onProgress callback registered
- Check event propagation
